---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: true
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: Cabral and Hadd
datePublished: '2016-02-18T23:37:50.464Z'
dateModified: '2016-02-18T22:17:33.420Z'
title: FT and ST
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-02-18-ft-and-st.md
published: true
url: ft-and-st/index.html
_type: Article

---
# FT and ST

This difference in the physical properties of both Lopes and Mamede basically pre-determined their different training and race strategies.

Lopes knew by trial and error (like all STs see Radcliffe) that he needed to take the lead at some point in the race and run away from the lead pack if he wanted to win. He knew that if he was with anyone at the bell who had a better kick than he did, he was almost certain to lose. We saw this in global finals with Radcliffe who would lead for something like 24 laps and then get passed by three runners in the final sprint (e.g.: Ribeiro, Tulu, Wami).

Mamede, on the other hand, who knew he was fast over 200-400m, simply needed to bide his time within the pack and then try to out-kick the opposition on the final lap. Both of these race tactics had their roots in the physiological differences between both runners. The title of the Cabral & Hadd thread is Two types of runners, and both these world-record holding Portuguese runners offer ideal examples of both types: Lopes (ST) and Mamede (FT). Hadd and I will get into this more deeply in future posts on that thread.

Lopes as an ST was able to get back very close to his best condition very quickly, as long as he was able to train hard without injury. This is typical of STs. The only major problem to him getting back into shape quickly was that he would eat too much when injured and inactive and would put on weight very quickly. For Lopes to stay in optimal condition he had to race often. In this he was the exact opposite of Mamede who never gained an extra pound of weight, and who would become over-tired with too frequent competition. 

What happens in a race is that Lopes does not have a huge reserve of anaerobic capacity to call upon at the bell. He does not have a sizeable percentage of FT fibres (unlike Mamede) to recruit and use to fire up a faster final minute in a 5,000m or 10,000m race.

## Are you ST?

In saying that both runners were physiologically different in muscle fibre type, and that this necessitated different race tactics to best suit their individual strengths, it should now be understood that both of these runners (types) also needed different training approaches to maximize their individual abilities. And these training approaches were different despite the fact they both trained under the same coach.

1\. Muscle biopsy. Go in, cut a bit of muscle out, and analyse it for fibre type content.
What? No takers?
Okay 

2\. Lactate test. Run a 600m all-out TT and determine peak lactate value (take a number of readings till BLa peaks post performance). We might find 8-12mM BLa for ST (depending on recent training; lower end if training for an upcoming marathon) and 18mM (or higher) for FT (depending on event).
Even more simple (remember, these are only rules of thumb not hard and fast rules) 

3\. You line up with other friends of a similar 10k performance level, for some hard 100m reps, you invariably finish last. (If you answer yes, you are likely to be more ST than your friends).
Here Antonio will probably tell us that Lopes would invariably last in the interval session of 400s and then then finish first in the weekend race. 

4\. Final kick over the last 200m in a 5k or 10k race. You lose to your rival every single (%^) time, even though your PRs are pretty much identical. (If yes, you are more ST. When you get fed up, go longer, youll smoke im at HM and M). 

5\. You positively dislike interval training with a vengeance and the long Sunday run and long LT-type runs are your favourite sessions of the week. (If yes, there is a good chance you are more an ST-type). 

6\. Look up your performance points on the IAAF Scoring Tables (available for download from iaaf.org). If your point score rises as the race distance lengthens, chances are you are more-ST. 

As can be seen, and should be appreciated, there are no hard-and-fast rules for determining into which category (ST vs FT) each runner might fall. The outliers at both ends of the spectrum are the easiest to classify, but just like in any Bell Curve, most of us will tend to fall in the middle. Over time and by checking how well they respond, or not, to different types of training each runner should get a better idea of where he/she lies on the ST-FT continuum. This knowledge will help them to fine-tune the optimal training for their particular physiology. 

What I find with FT runners is that they are more irregular in their performances (less predictable, if you like) than STs. Their best shape seems less long-lasting than ST runners. The FT runner gets into good condition more quickly than the ST-type, but also loses it more quickly.
The ST-type normally takes more time to get into top shape, but will remain in that condition for longer. Consequently, I believe the FT runner needs to compete more often as a faster stimulus but the ST is the one usually able to compete with steady results for a whole season.

## FT: 

Track: 10 x 400m in 64.2 avg 100m jog recovery in 45 secs
(Format: interval training w/active recovery) 

5 x 1000m in 2:37, 2:36, 2:32, 2:37, 2.29 2:30 mins standstill recovery
(Format: repetition training w/standstill / walk recovery) 

## ST:

An ST should always be working on improving 5k performance, because every time that happens, getting a knock-on improvement at all longer distances comes relatively easily for that type. 

* 6 x 800m at 104% of 5k pace with everything from equal time recovery (down to) 1:15-1:30 recovery. 

* 5-6 x 1k at 5k pace with 200m jog recovery in 90 secs 

* 3 x 3k at 95-96% of 5k pace with 800m jog recovery 

* 2 x 5k at 93-94% of 5k pace with 800m jog recovery 

* 8k at 92% of 5k pace 

* 16-20k at 85-90% of 5k pace  

* 50 min total including 25min tempo run
(Ex: 25min easy + 25min/tempo run. Tempo runs were judged by feeling and measured by minutes of duration. We may estimate the pace of those tempo runs that lasted 20-40min as somewhere between 10k and HM pace. The result of the daily run that includes tempo run is 17k to 18.5k by hour) 

* 30min easy (track) 15 x 400m in av 62.1 (~3k target pace) with 1:10 rec 10min c/d  

* 30min easy (track) 5 x 1000m in av 2:40 (~5k target pace) OR 4 x 1200m in av 3:13 (~5k target pace) OR 3 x 2000m in av 5:32 (~10k target pace). Irrespective of which session is done, always 3:00 standstill rec 10min c/d